No, you can sit over here. Okay, the tape is on. We have a visitor tonight, my
wife, who read the book and loved it, so she wanted to sit in and listen. Oh,
fine. See what an author sounds like. Okay, as I said, the tape is on. Why a
novel featuring both vampires and the Mississippi Riverboat era? Well, I could
say why not, but that would be evading the issue. Essentially, the vampires came
first in my own personal...
The vampires came first as I was putting the book together. I had read a fair
amount about vampires. I had read other people's vampire novels as far as
Dracula and some of the other books done recently, and I had wanted to do my own
version of that legend for some time because I had a few ideas about it. But I
didn't want it to be just another Dracula book, just another rehash of the same
old legend, because we've seen vampire books after vampire books that are
essentially just the same thing spun over and over again, and I think that's a
little tiresome. And at the same time I was going through all these talks about
vampires was the period that I was living in Dubuque, Iowa. I taught college
there for three years, and Dubuque, of course, is an old river town. It was once
a big steamboat manufacturing center, and it's still very much imbued with the
whole history of the great era of steam on the Mississippi. So it was during
that period while I was in Dubuque that I got interested in that period of
history. I got interested in the steamboats. I read a fair amount about them,
and once I did, the two things just seemed to come together in my mind. There's
a certain romanticism, I think, a dark romanticism that clings to both the old
steamboats and vampires. They're both very attractive in a certain sense, the
elegant vampire and the stately, intricate, gorgeous steamboat, but they also
have dark sides, too, of course. It's obvious in the case of the vampire. In the
case of the steamboat, they were very dangerous most of travel. They were always
blowing up, and boiler explosions, fires, having a bomb torn out by the river.
It was a tumultuous time, and the river towns were rough, dangerous places. You
had towns like Natchez-on-the-Hill, for example, which are Natchez-on-the-Hill,
the kind of double city of Natchez that existed at that time and is referred to
in the book. It seems to me that's an almost literal metaphor for the vampirism,
the two natures, good and bad, together in one entity.
Why do you think vampires are so attractive to people? Through the years they've
been popular, and it seems like now they're really popular. Why is that? That's
an interesting question.
Vampires are an almost universal legend, which is one thing that turned out when
I was researching Fever Dream. The vampires we're familiar with, of course,
Dracula and his kin, so to speak, and all the books that are derived from that
tradition are essentially retreads of Eastern European, Romanian, Hungarian,
largely vampire legends. But if you look around the world, you'll find vampire
legends everywhere. In China, in Africa, in the South Seas, there are variants
of the vampire legend. The details differ, but the basic vision of a nocturnal
predator that preys on human beings is present in all of these. And so that
would lead you to wonder why do they have this universal appeal? The easy answer
as to why they're appealing in our culture today, in modern American mass
society, I think is the sexual nature of the vampire. The sexual symbolism
embodied in Dracula and in the way it's been treated by Hollywood, the symbolism
of vampire as seductor
is...
appeals to something within us and gives legend a lot more resonances than, say,
the werewolf legend or zombies or some of the other things that have never
really achieved the popularity of the vampire legend. But... then you could say,
well, that's true for us, but it doesn't explain why the legend is so universal
around the world. And indeed it doesn't, but I don't have an answer to that. In
the terms of fever dream, I looked at that universality and I made it one of the
bases when I started writing the novel. I said, what if the reason that these
legends are universal is because they're all remembering the same thing? They're
all remembering some kind of racial memory of a real man-like predatory animal,
blood drinker, that is somehow the basis for all the vampire legends. And that
was the premise that I, of course, used in fever dream. You incorporated some of
the traditional vampire elements such as they couldn't come out in the middle of
the day. But yet some of the others, they couldn't see their... well, you
couldn't see their images in a mirror, the fear of silver, I assume garlic was
out, whatever. Was this kind of a conscious sifting through the vampire
traditions and settling on ones that seemed reasonable and others that just
seemed like they would just be fantasy or hearsay about vampires? Yeah, more or
less. I wanted to have rationalized vampires. I wanted to have vampires that I
thought could actually just... that were not based on, on, you know, vague
supernatural legends handed down over the years. So I had to look at each of the
particular beliefs associated with vampires and see, is there any way that I
could justify this in a rational manner? Now, obviously, something about
vampires not coming out during day, which the vampires in my book, Fever Dream,
do have that characteristic. Well, that's very easily explainable. It's just...
They're nocturnal creatures. Their skin is extremely sensitive to ultraviolet,
so they burn very badly if they're exposed to daylight. So they avoid it. You
can justify that easily. But you look at something that's not reflected in
mirrors. I mean, there's no way to justify not being reflected in mirrors
scientifically. You have to rewrite, essentially, all the laws governing light
and reflection and refraction and so on. That's strictly a supernatural motif,
so I had to get rid of that. Obviously, considering that the book is about
vampires on Mississippi River steamboats, I had to get rid of the one that said
they can't cross running water as well since they sail up and down the steamboat
all through the book.
Your concept of the red thirst, which came upon the vampires periodically, was
something I had not run into before in vampire legends. That, again, I would
assume was part of the rationalizing their existence in this world as opposed to
just the fantasy vampires. More or less, yeah. And it was also part of what I
was trying to do with Fever Dream thematically.
I suppose, as much as anything else, I mean, the book is about vampires on
Mississippi River steamboats, but in a deeper sense, it's about moral choices.
And one of the things that Joshua York, the vampire, says to Abner, Abner Marsh,
the protagonist, and that Abner later says back to him, is, you make your
choices. We all make our choices. If you take the traditional vampire thing, the
traditional vampire beliefs, the traditional vision of the vampire, you don't
have choice. The vampire is an avatar of undying, ancient, and absolutely black
evil.
Well, okay, fine, that makes for good entertainment, but as it interacts with
the real world, it's kind of a hollow construct. The real world is made up of
greys. I mean, real people are made up of greys. We don't have absolute goods,
and we don't have absolute evils. The good and evil that we have, you know,
resides in each of us, and it is a matter of moral choice. So that's why the
book is constructed around four characters, two human beings and two vampires,
but issues of good and evil are not easily broken down. There are good human
beings and good vampires in the terms of the book, and there is a bad vampire,
an evil vampire, but also an evil human being. So the four characters of the
four major characters, Abner, Joshua, Damon Julian, and Sour Billy Tipton all
kind of reflect and interact with each other in what I hope are interesting
ways. When did Julian make his choice? Just eons ago, or did he ever really
think about making a choice as far as this moral choice? Well, he did make a
choice eons ago, but he also makes the choice in terms of the book at the
banquet when he essentially rejects what Joshua has to offer
and states his opposition to Joshua with saying, you know, we are born, this is
what we are born to be, masters of humanity, people who take the lives of those
inferior to us, and this is our nature. So he is making a choice there. He's
rejecting Joshua's potion, he's rejecting the freedom from the red thirst that
Joshua offers, and he's accepting what he thinks is of his superior nature. Of
course, there's also certain, you know, resonances there with the whole slavery
thing, which I tried to put through all the way through the book. It takes place
in the antebellum south, late antebellum south, and the slavery issue, of
course, is very hot then, and the whole master-slave thing that existed between
blacks and whites in the south then has a kind of fantasy reflection in
relations between vampires and human beings. Captain Marsh was a character that
I really liked, and I think he's one of the strongest characters you've come up
with in your writing. Did he occur to you early, or did he occur to you as you
started doing the research and were looking for a strong protagonist? Well, like
any character, I think in a work of fiction like a novel, Abner Marsh just grew.
I mean, I had the basic outlines of the character when I started the book, but
the more you write about him, the more you learn and get to know the character,
and you go back later and you do subsequent drafts, changing some of the stuff
that goes earlier on. By the time I finished Fever Dream, I was thoroughly
enraptured with Abner, who was a character that I liked very much also, and I'm
glad he came across as well. There are certain real riverboat captains who were
loose models for Abner Marsh, but he's not modeled strictly on any one person. I
took a couple characteristics from one famous steamboat captain and a couple
from another, and just a couple from other people that I knew, and sort of mixed
them together and came up with Abner.
Okay. One thing, you mentioned Captain Marsh and then the slavery. I thought one
thing that made it effective was Captain Marsh's essential neutrality towards
slavery, and then things kind of slowly dawned on him. He wasn't up on a
soapbox, either pro or against, so it didn't come across as preachy, and that
was appreciated by the reader, definitely. Oh, thank you. Well, of course, that
was the intention, that Marsh's exposure to Joshua, and exposure to the whole
night folks, as he calls them, or vampires,
changes him. It makes him a much different man at the end than at the beginning.
Abner Marsh is never an evil man. I think by nature he is a good man, but he is
a man at the beginning of the book who is essentially just living his own life,
and the great moral issues of his time, like slavery, are things he kind of
hashes out over the dinner table, but never has any great personal involvement
in.
But as a result of the whole experience with the steamer fever dream and the
things that happen to him, I think Marsh changes and becomes, in essence, a man
who is much more aware of the necessity to make moral choices.
Fever dream is a storehouse of old historical fact and descriptions and that
sort of thing. I assume you spent a lot of time researching this before you
actually sat down to write it. I did about, it took me two years to do fever
dream altogether. The first year of that was largely research. I did not
research it, you know, eight hours every day, but I was still teaching at the
Buick during the period where I actually began the research, but I did a fair
amount of it and as I said, it did take me a year. I read considerably in the
field. I traveled on as many of the existing steamboats as I could, those that
still fly the Mississippi River system. And I went to various cities where
scenes from the book take place, St. Louis, New Orleans, Louisville, and so
forth, and visit the steamboat museums there, walk the streets to get a little
feel of, especially in the older sections of town like the French Quarter in New
Orleans. So a lot of research did go into it, yes. I think that's a necessity if
you're going to do justice to any sort of historical fiction. Fever Dream, of
course, is historical horror, but I still think you owe your readers that debt
of accuracy insofar as you're capable of it. Was there ever a riverboat as grand
as the Fever Dream? Oh, yeah. The dimensions of the Fever Dream and the capacity
of her engines and so forth are modeled very closely on the Eclipse. In terms of
the book, the Eclipse is the queen of the river, the fastest, largest, and most
luxurious boat, and it's the one Abner Marsh aspires to displace as fastest
steamer on the river, and that's why it built the Fever Dream. The Eclipse was a
real historical boat of its era, the 1850s, and was considered the fastest boat
of that era, did indeed win a very famous steamboat race against the Shotwell,
and some people, including Mark Twain, put forward evidence that the Fever Dream
was, in fact, the fastest steamer ever on the river. And there were later
steamers in the 1870s and the 1880s that, while they were not perhaps as fast as
the Fever Dream in the book or the Eclipse in real life, were even more
luxurious,
like the J.M. White, a very fast and incredibly luxurious steamer of the 1870s,
1880s.
I was surprised at the lack of longevity of steamboats. They just didn't last
very long, did they? No, they didn't. That was one of the interesting things
that turned up when I was researching it that kind of startled me, too. I mean,
they're such formidable-looking structures. You'd think they'd be around for
ages, but, in fact,
they had a shorter lifespan than the modern car.
Hold on a second. Someone's at my door. Can you turn off the recorder a second?
No problem.
Hello? Bill? Yes, sir. Here I am now. Okay, the tape is back on.
Fever Dream, as I recall, is what they used to call a stretch of the river. Was
that a town? For some reason, it escapes me. I didn't write this down. What
Fever Dream was before the book, where he got the name? Oh, well, I guess I'll
ask his dad. Well, Christy, the title of the book is taken from the name of the
steamboat in the book. The Fever Dream is named the steamboat. And the reason
Avner Marsh names the steamboat the Fever Dream is because it is the boat he has
always dreamed of having, the grand, luxurious, fast steamer, and because he is
the president. His company is called Fever River Package Company, with that odd
spelling, the R-E inverted. He was born in Galena, Illinois. And the river,
Galena, is located on a small tributary that comes off the Mississippi, which
originally was named the Fever River, F-E-V-R-E River, in the early 1800s. And
Marsh, of course, was born during that period and grew up calling it. In point
of fact, and this is all historically true, the name of that river was changed
to Galena River fairly early on because the town got respectable and they didn't
want people thinking they were all sick there. So they thought it would be
better to call it the Galena River. But Galena was a very important steamboat
town and the Fever in its early days, today it's nothing but a creek. It's
completely silted up and I've visited it and you couldn't get a rowboat up it,
let alone a major steamer. But in the early 1800s, Galena was a major steamboat
port and the Fever or the Galena River, as it later became, was a very bustling
little tributary indeed. And a lot of traffic went up and down it. There was no
real Fever River Packet Company however.
I heard in Lubbock George Proctor talking to you about the cover of the book. He
said it wouldn't help sell the book. I guess I'll ask, first of all, does an
author have any say-so in a cover? Second of all, does it really matter? And
thirdly, what did you think of the cover of Fever Dream? First of all, does the
author have any say-so? The author has minimal say-so. They will ask the author
for advice in some cases. I'd say maybe once out of four times they'll ask the
author. But that doesn't mean they pay any attention to anything the author
might say after they ask him. In the case of Fever Dream, I think it's the best
cover I've ever gotten. I think George is absolutely dead wrong in that. It's a
wonderful cover. I have the original art, which I've purchased now hanging on my
wall. It is an inaccurate cover in one respect. The steamboat that is portrayed
on the cover is a stern wheeler when the fever dream in the book is a side
wheeler, which was much more common. The side wheelers were the class boats of
the river. But it's still a marvelously executed cover, I think. And lovely,
subtle, the kind of ghost boat look and the reflection of a vampire in the
water. And as for not selling the book, well, the book is already in its second
printing and seems to be doing very well. It's gotten the best reviews I've ever
gotten in my career. So I'm very happy with the way it's selling so far. Great.
Are you a fan of Lord Byron by any chance? Yeah.
Byron and Shelley, the Romantics.
Okay. You mentioned that you had started working on this book when you were in
Dubuque. How did it fit in with the writing of the other books that have come
out? Did you weave its writing in and out with them? Do you tend to write books
one at a time? No, I write books one at a time, but the publishing industry
publishes them slowly, which is something that I guess many readers don't
realize. I was in Dubuque from 1976 through 1979.
I began work on Fever Dream, began researching it late in 1978. So for the last
month or so of 1978 and for most of 1979, I devoted to research on Fever Dream
while I was teaching. I actually sat down and began writing Fever Dream right at
the end of 1979, around December or so. And I, 1980, I moved to Santa Fe.
Actually, it was very, like, Christmas, 1979, I moved to New Mexico. And my
first year here was essentially just devoted to work on Fever Dream. I finished
it late in 1980. That was when it was sold. And it has been two years in the
making, during which period I have gone on and written other books. The
publisher, was it Poseidon? Poseidon Press. Yeah. How are they related to the
other presses? Poseidon Press is, uh... Well, Poseidon Press is essentially a
new imprint of, uh, Pocketbook Simon & Schuster. So, it's a... Although it bears
Poseidon Press imprint, it is edited by editors, Pocketbook's editors, and
distributed through to Simon & Schuster's sales reps. The whole
interrelationships of imprints and publishers is, uh, perhaps too complicated
and not sufficiently interesting to go into. So, uh, the major thing for people
seeking to book to know is that, uh, Fever Dream is, it's a Poseidon Press
hardcover and distributed through Simon & Schuster can be obtained through them.
Um, any, uh, sequels or prequels, uh, for the future? I've had several people
suggest sequels to me. Uh, I have no immediate plans for doing any. No, I think
the story, um, finishes when it finishes. But I wouldn't rule them out
completely. Obviously, the type of vampires exist in the book. I could do more
with if I chose to. I would think prequels might, uh, might almost be in order
more than sequels in that, uh, you could go even earlier. However, I guess Marsh
is out. Uh, he would be, uh, he would be an interesting case. Maybe you could
write the 13 years, uh, what he did then, if you ever wanted to go back to him.
Right. Okay, one final question then, uh, I guess just more for the, uh, in
general, uh, this is, uh, uh, a, more or less in the horror genre if we have to
assign genres to things. Uh, right. Why, uh, why is that genre thriving? It's, I
guess more than thriving now, but that, that seems to be the biggest genre, even
bigger than romances. Um, again, uh, what, uh, what, why do people like to get
scared at this particular point in history?
That's an interesting question. I'm not sure I have, um, a good answer for it. I
could take a stab at it. Um, I think part of it is simply a literary phenomenon.
Uh, Stephen King, uh, an enormously talented writer who, who has revolutionized
and modernized horror and made it an extremely viable form once again after
decades in the doldrums. And a lot of it is, is people's response to King has
been so enormous that a lot of imitators have come in. I, I hope that I, with
Fever Dream, I've, uh, done a little more than imitation. I tried to bring
something new and original to it in a deeper psychological sense beyond simply
the literary and commercial success story of King. I think people may be going
to horror because it's, in horror novels we're scared, yeah, but we can kind of
control the scares. And, you know, we can, we can read the book and scare
ourselves. But then we put down the book and we know that what we're afraid of,
vampires, werewolves, haunted hotels, whatever,
is not real. And people don't mind dealing with that and kind of getting a
little catharsis out of that. But they don't want to deal with real, the real
terrifying things of violence in the streets and crime and crazed psychos out
there and the threat of nuclear holocaust and all of the other more real fears
that also hang over us. So I think that may be part of it. Would you object if
somebody came along and said they wanted to make a movie out of Fever Dream? It
seems like a good candidate for a movie. Well, I would love to see it made into
a movie. And we've had a fair amount of interest from Hollywood, but nothing
definite. Oh, good. I envisioned Sour Billy was just Warren Oates, just straight
Warren Oates, especially at the first. Towards the end, it was more difficult to
imagine it, but I could just see the whole movie. I don't know who would be
Captain Marsh, though. That would be a hard one to cast, to get somebody to gain
a lot of weight. Well, I could see Ed Esner in it. Yeah, that's true. Yeah.
Yeah, he would be good. Wow. Okay. Have to go back and reread it with that in
mind. Do you have any questions, Susan? Okay. She doesn't want to ask any.
George, thanks very much. I enjoyed it. No, thank you. And plus, I enjoyed the
book, really. It was quite good. Well, I'm glad to hear that, of course. And
thanks for doing the interview. Will you be able to send me a tape like you did
on the last one? Sure. You want a tape of the Raw interview as well? No, I have
to tape of the finished product. Yeah, we'll send you a tape of the finished
product. I'll probably write it up pretty quick, and we'll get a few shows out
of it, and we'll send it on to you. Yeah. Okay. When you send that to me, could
you also like to include a list of the stations will be broadcast because I know
the public relations people at Simon & Schuster would like to know that. Sure.
Be glad to. Okay. No problem. George, thanks again. Keep on writing. Look
forward to seeing what's coming out next. Sounds good. I'll see you at Texas
Con. Great. Bye-bye now. Bye-bye. Bye-bye. Bye-bye. Bye-bye. Bye-bye. Bye-bye.
Bye-bye.